.TH MYBTRFS 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs \- btrfs-native backup tool with incremental send/receive and GFS retention
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fICOMMAND\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs
is a Rust reimagining of
.BR btrbk (1),
a backup tool for btrfs subvolumes. It creates read-only snapshots,
sends/receives them incrementally to a target filesystem (local or remote SSH),
and manages retention with Grandfather-Father-Son (GFS) policies.
.PP
All state is stateless: every run re-derives the backup graph from live btrfs metadata
(UUIDs), never from a side database. Subvolume relationships are resolved from
.BR "btrfs subvolume show" (8)
output, and the tool verifies every transfer by checking the received UUID.
.PP
.B mybtrfs
is CLI-first (not config-file-driven). Backups are invoked via command-line arguments
or a multi-job
.B backup-set
TOML file (see
.BR mybtrfs-run (1)).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to all confirmations (e.g., creating missing directories).
Use for non-interactive / cron scripts.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and post-run summary. Useful for cron / scripting.
Progress is also suppressed automatically when stderr is not a TTY.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Append a timestamped audit line to the journal file for this invocation.
Useful for tracking backup history. Creates parent directories if needed.
.TP
.BR \-\-lock " \fIPATH\fR"
Advisory flock file serializing mutating runs. Default: \fI<tmpdir>/mybtrfs-<uid>.lock\fR.
A second run that finds the lock held exits immediately with code 3.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write logs to a file instead of stderr (frees stderr for progress indicators).
Default: \fI/var/log/mybtrfs.log\fR (created if it does not exist; the tool requires root).
Use \fI/dev/null\fR to suppress logging.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help message.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print version number.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B snapshot \fISRC SNAP_DIR BASENAME\fR
Create a read-only snapshot of a source subvolume.
See
.BR mybtrfs-snapshot (1).
.TP
.B run \fISRC SNAP_DIR BASENAME [TARGET]\fR
Full backup: snapshot, send/receive to target, then prune per retention policy.
See
.BR mybtrfs-run (1).
.TP
.B resume \fISNAP_DIR BASENAME TARGET\fR
Resume an incomplete backup without creating a new snapshot.
See
.BR mybtrfs-resume (1).
.TP
.B prune \fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
Prune snapshots and backups per retention policy.
See
.BR mybtrfs-prune (1).
.TP
.B restore \fIBACKUP DEST\fR
Restore a backup to a writable subvolume.
See
.BR mybtrfs-restore (1).
.TP
.B list \fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
List source snapshots with their correlated backups.
See
.BR mybtrfs-list (1).
.TP
.B stats \fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
Show aggregate backup statistics (counts, sizes, space savings).
See
.BR mybtrfs-stats (1).
.TP
.B status \fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
Show backup health: snapshot/backup counts, latest ages, journal-backed history.
See
.BR mybtrfs-status (1).
.TP
.B diff \fIOLDER_SNAP NEWER_SNAP\fR
Estimate changed bytes between two snapshots (predicts incremental size).
See
.BR mybtrfs-diff (1).
.TP
.B list\-drives
List candidate btrfs filesystems for backup targets.
.TP
.B list\-subvolumes
List every btrfs subvolume across all mounted btrfs filesystems.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Generic failure (command could not complete).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad arguments or malformed input).
.TP
.B 3
Run lock held by another invocation.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied: operation requires root privileges. Re-run with
.BR sudo (8).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Full backup to a discovered drive (interactive):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data
.EE
.TP
Backup to an explicit target with retention:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-daily 7 --target-preserve-daily 30
.EE
.TP
Backup to a remote SSH target:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data ssh://user@backup.example.com/path
.EE
.TP
Multi-subvolume backup from a backup-set file:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run --set /etc/mybtrfs.backup-set.toml
.EE
.TP
Check backup health:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs status /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup
.EE
.TP
Preview what retention would delete (dry-run):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs prune --dry-run /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-daily 7
.EE
.SH SAFETY INVARIANTS
mybtrfs enforces the following guarantees:
.TP
1. Send/receive verification
Never trust a transfer by exit code alone. After every receive,
mybtrfs verifies the target is read-only, carries a
.B received_uuid,
and has the correct
.B parent_uuid.
.TP
2. Delete-safety anchors
Snapshots and backups critical to incremental chains are preserved.
The just-created snapshot and the latest common pair are never deleted.
If any target becomes unreachable during a run, snapshot deletion is skipped entirely.
.TP
3. Restore read-only trap
Never flips read-only via
.BR "btrfs property set" (8),
which silently breaks future incremental backups.
Writable snapshots are created via
.BR "btrfs subvolume snapshot" (8)
without the \fB-r\fR flag.
.TP
4. Stateless and idempotent
All truth is re-derived from live btrfs metadata each run.
Snapshots and backups are named with timestamps and collision counters.
Non-matching names are left untouched.
Duplicate UUIDs are hard-refused (cloned-disk guard).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Enable detailed logging. Set to
.B debug
or
.B trace
for verbose output (inspect with
.BR lnav (1)
or
.BR tail (1)).
Example:
.EX
RUST_LOG=debug sudo mybtrfs run ...
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR mybtrfs-prune (1),
.BR mybtrfs-restore (1),
.BR mybtrfs-status (1),
.BR btrfs (8),
.BR btrfs-subvolume (8),
.BR btrbk (1)
.SH DOCUMENTATION
Full design and architecture documentation is available in the repository:
.BR https://github.com/jvidal86/mybtrfs/tree/main/documentation
.SH LICENSE
GPL-3.0-or-later. See LICENSE file in the repository.
.SH AUTHOR
J Vidal (j.vidal.rodriguez@gmail.com)
