.TH MYBTRFS-RUN 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-run \- full backup: snapshot, send/receive, and prune in one command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs run
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fI--set BACKUP_SET_FILE\fR | \fISRC SNAP_DIR BASENAME [TARGET]\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs run
performs a complete backup workflow:
.TP
1. Create a read-only snapshot of the source subvolume
.TP
2. Send the snapshot incrementally (if applicable) to a target filesystem
.TP
3. Verify the received copy (read-only, correct UUID)
.TP
4. Prune old snapshots and backups per retention policy
.PP
This is the primary workflow. For multi-subvolume backups, use
.B --set
to specify a TOML backup-set file with multiple
.B [[backup]]
entries (see BACKUP-SET FILE below).
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B SRC
Source btrfs subvolume to back up. Can be any mounted subvolume path.
.TP
.B SNAP_DIR
Directory (on the same filesystem as SRC) where snapshots will be stored.
Created automatically if missing (with confirmation, unless
.B --yes
is set).
.TP
.B BASENAME
Base name for generated snapshots/backups (e.g.,
.BR home,
.BR data).
Snapshots and backups are named as:
.B <BASENAME>.<TIMESTAMP>[_N]
where N is a collision counter (incremented if the name already exists).
.TP
.B TARGET
(Optional) Backup destination: either a local directory path or a remote
.B ssh://[user@]host[:port]/path
endpoint.
.B
If omitted, you are prompted to pick from discovered btrfs drives.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-set " \fIPATH\fR"
Read backup jobs from a TOML file instead of using positional arguments.
See BACKUP-SET FILE below. When provided, SRC, SNAP_DIR, and BASENAME are optional.
.TP
.B \-\-incremental {yes|no|strict}
Control
.BR "btrfs send" (8)
.B -p
behavior (default:
.BR yes).
.RS
.TP
.B yes
Use
.B -p
(incremental) if a parent is available, otherwise full backup.
.TP
.B no
Never use
.B -p;
always send the full subvolume.
.TP
.B strict
Require a valid parent; fail if none exists.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-min " \fISPEC\fR"
Minimum snapshots to preserve regardless of age (default:
.BR all).
Values:
.B all
(keep everything),
.B latest
(keep only the newest),
.B no
(let retention tiers decide),
or a count like
.B 3d
(keep at least 3 days' worth).
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve " \fISPEC\fR"
Retention tiers for source snapshots using GFS notation (default: keep all).
Example:
.B "24h 7d 4w 12m"
(keep hourly for 24 hours, daily for 7 days, weekly for 4 weeks, monthly for 12 months).
See RETENTION POLICIES below.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-min " \fISPEC\fR"
Minimum backups to preserve (default:
.BR all).
Same values as
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-min .
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve " \fISPEC\fR"
Retention tiers for backups (default: keep all).
Same format as
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve .
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to all confirmations (e.g., creating missing directories).
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and summary output.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Log this invocation to an audit file.
.TP
.BR \-\-lock " \fIPATH\fR"
Use a custom run lock file (default: \fI<tmpdir>/mybtrfs-<uid>.lock\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH BACKUP-SET FILE
The
.B --set
option reads a TOML file containing multiple backup jobs. This enables
multi-subvolume backups without scripting.
.PP
Format: each
.B [[backup]]
section defines one job.
.EX
[[backup]]
source = "/mnt/data"
snapshot_dir = "/mnt/snapshots"
basename = "data"
target_dir = "/mnt/backup"
incremental = "yes"
snapshot_preserve_daily = 7

[[backup]]
source = "/mnt/home"
snapshot_dir = "/mnt/snapshots"
basename = "home"
target_dir = "ssh://backup.example.com/data/home"
snapshot_preserve_daily = 30
target_preserve_daily = 365
.EE
.PP
All fields match the command-line arguments.
Optional retention fields override command-line defaults for that entry.
.SH RETENTION POLICIES
Retention uses Grandfather-Father-Son (GFS) scheduling.
Specify tiers as:
.B "24h 7d 4w 12m"
(keep one per hour for 24 hours, one per day for 7 days, etc.).
.PP
Supported time units:
.B h
(hours),
.B d
(days),
.B w
(weeks),
.B m
(months),
.B y
(years).
.PP
.B preserve-min
shortcuts:
.TP
.B all
Keep every snapshot/backup (default). Overrides all tiers.
.TP
.B latest
Keep only the newest. Overrides all tiers.
.TP
.B none
Use only the scheduled tiers (no minimum).
.SH OUTPUT
On success, tab-separated output (scriptable, no emojis):
.EX
snapshot	/path/to/snapshot
backup	/path/to/backup
pruned	N	M
.EE
where N is snapshots deleted and M is backups deleted.
.PP
With
.B --quiet,
only errors are printed.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Backup completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Backup failed (e.g., transfer error, send/receive failure).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad arguments).
.TP
.B 3
Run lock held by another invocation.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root). Re-run with
.BR sudo (8).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Full backup with interactive target selection:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data
.EE
.TP
Incremental backup to an explicit target:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup
.EE
.TP
With retention policy (keep 7 days of daily snapshots):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-daily 7 --target-preserve-daily 30
.EE
.TP
Strict incremental (fail if no parent found):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup \\
  --incremental strict
.EE
.TP
Remote backup via SSH:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data \\
  ssh://user@backup.example.com:2222/backups/myhost
.EE
.TP
From a backup-set file (multi-subvolume):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run --set /etc/mybtrfs.backup-set.toml
.EE
.TP
Non-interactive for cron (with logging):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs run /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup \\
  --yes --quiet --journal /var/log/mybtrfs.journal
.EE
.SH NOTES
.TP
\(bu
Snapshots are read-only and immutable; they can safely coexist with active data.
.TP
\(bu
Incremental backups require a valid parent relationship (matching parent_uuid).
If the parent is missing or corrupted, the incremental fails; use
.B --incremental no
for a full backup fallback.
.TP
\(bu
The tool verifies every transfer: if the received copy is missing a
.B received_uuid
or has the wrong
.B parent_uuid,
it is deleted and an error is raised.
.TP
\(bu
All timestamps are in the system's local timezone.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-prune (1),
.BR mybtrfs-restore (1),
.BR mybtrfs-status (1),
.BR btrfs-send (8),
.BR btrfs-receive (8),
.BR ssh (1)
