.TH MYBTRFS-RESTORE 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-restore \- restore a backup to a writable subvolume
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs restore
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIBACKUP DEST\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs restore
recovers data from a read-only backup (received subvolume) by creating a
writable copy.
.PP
The process:
.TP
1. Transfer the backup from remote to local (if needed, e.g.,
.B ssh://
backup).
.TP
2. Create a writable snapshot via
.BR "btrfs subvolume snapshot" (8)
without
.B -r
(never use
.BR "btrfs property set ro=false" (8),
which silently breaks future incrementals).
.TP
3. Clean up any temporary copies.
.PP
If
.B DEST
already exists and
.B --force
is not set, the operation is refused.
With
.B --force,
the existing destination is moved to
.B <DEST>.broken
and the restore proceeds.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B BACKUP
Path to a read-only backup subvolume (local or remote
.B ssh://[user@]host[:port]/path).
.TP
.B DEST
Where to create the writable restored subvolume. Must be on a btrfs filesystem.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-force
If
.B DEST
exists, move it aside to
.B <DEST>.broken[_N]
(with collision counter) instead of refusing.
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Show the intended plan (move-aside + writable snapshot) without creating
or moving anything.
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to all confirmations.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and summary output.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Log invocation to an audit file.
.TP
.BR \-\-lock " \fIPATH\fR"
Use a custom run lock file.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
Tab-separated format showing the restore plan:
.EX
restored	/path/to/writable/subvolume
.EE
.PP
If an existing destination was moved aside:
.EX
move_aside	/path/to/moved_backup
.EE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Restore completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Restore failed (e.g., snapshot creation error).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 3
Run lock held.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Simple restore from a local backup:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs restore /mnt/backup/data.20260624T1803 /mnt/data_restored
.EE
.TP
Restore from a remote backup (transferred locally first):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs restore ssh://backup.example.com/data/home.20260624T1803 \\
  /mnt/home_restored
.EE
.TP
Force overwrite an existing destination:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs restore /mnt/backup/data.20260624T1803 /mnt/data_restored \\
  --force
.EE
.TP
Dry-run (preview the plan):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs restore /mnt/backup/data.20260624T1803 /mnt/data_restored \\
  --dry-run
.EE
.SH NOTES
.TP
\(bu
The restored subvolume is writable and fully independent from the backup.
.TP
\(bu
If the backup was an incremental (has a
.B parent_uuid),
the restored copy is still valid; it carries the same data.
.TP
\(bu
The destination must be on a btrfs filesystem (same or different from the backup).
.TP
\(bu
Remote backups (
.B ssh://
) are transferred to the local system before creating the writable copy.
.TP
\(bu
After restore, the original backup remains unchanged and read-only.
.SH SAFETY
.TP
\(bu
Never use
.BR "btrfs property set ro=false" (8)
to make a backup writable; it silently corrupts the
.B received_uuid
and breaks future incrementals.
.B mybtrfs restore
always uses
.BR "btrfs subvolume snapshot" (8),
which is the only safe path to a writable copy.
.TP
\(bu
If the destination exists,
.B --force
is required; otherwise the operation is refused (safety against accidental overwrites).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR btrfs-subvolume (8),
.BR ssh (1)
