.TH MYBTRFS-PRUNE 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-prune \- delete old snapshots and backups per retention policy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs prune
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs prune
deletes old snapshots and backups based on the specified (or default) retention policy.
This is typically called automatically by
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
but can be run independently to clean up without creating new snapshots or transfers.
.PP
Uses Grandfather-Father-Son (GFS) scheduling to decide which snapshots/backups to keep.
By default, keeps everything (
.B preserve-min all
). Use
.B --snapshot-preserve-daily
and similar flags to enforce retention windows.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B SNAP_DIR
Directory containing source snapshots.
.TP
.B TARGET
Backup target: local directory path or remote
.B ssh://[user@]host[:port]/path.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Show what would be deleted without actually deleting anything.
Useful for testing a retention policy before applying it.
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-min " \{all|latest|none\}"
Minimum snapshots to preserve (default:
.BR all).
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve " \fISPEC\fR"
Retention tiers for source snapshots (e.g.,
.B "24h 7d 4w 12m"
). See
.BR mybtrfs-run (1)
for format details.
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-hourly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N hourly snapshots.
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-daily " \fIN\fR"
Keep N daily snapshots.
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-weekly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N weekly snapshots.
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-monthly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N monthly snapshots.
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-yearly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N yearly snapshots.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-min " \{all|latest|none\}"
Minimum backups to preserve (default:
.BR all).
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve " \fISPEC\fR"
Retention tiers for backups.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-hourly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N hourly backups.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-daily " \fIN\fR"
Keep N daily backups.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-weekly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N weekly backups.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-monthly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N monthly backups.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-yearly " \fIN\fR"
Keep N yearly backups.
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to all confirmations.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and summary output.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Log invocation to an audit file.
.TP
.BR \-\-lock " \fIPATH\fR"
Use a custom run lock file.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
Tab-separated format:
.EX
pruned	N	M
.EE
where N is snapshots deleted and M is backups deleted.
.PP
With
.B --dry-run,
prefixes each item with
.B would delete:
instead of performing deletions.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Pruning completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Prune failed (e.g., deletion error).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 3
Run lock held.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Dry-run: preview what would be deleted:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs prune --dry-run /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-daily 7 --target-preserve-daily 30
.EE
.TP
Enforce retention policy (keep 7 days of daily snapshots):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs prune /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-daily 7 --target-preserve-daily 30
.EE
.TP
Keep only the latest snapshot (aggressive cleanup):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs prune /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-min latest --target-preserve-min latest
.EE
.TP
Delete everything except the latest (nuclear option):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs prune /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve-min none --target-preserve-min none
.EE
.SH SAFETY
Prune is conservative: it will not delete if:
.TP
\(bu
The just-created snapshot/backup is in the schedule (always preserved).
.TP
\(bu
A backup needs a snapshot as a parent for future incrementals
(the latest common pair is preserved).
.TP
\(bu
Any target became unreachable during the preceding
.BR mybtrfs-run (1)
(all snapshot deletion is skipped).
.PP
Use
.B --dry-run
to verify the policy before applying.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR mybtrfs-status (1)
