.TH MYBTRFS-RESUME 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-resume \- re-send the latest snapshot without creating a new one
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs resume
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fISNAP_DIR BASENAME TARGET\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs resume
transfers the latest existing snapshot for
.I BASENAME
that has not yet been backed up to
.IR TARGET ,
then prunes per the retention policy. No new snapshot is created.
.PP
This is the recovery path for an interrupted
.BR mybtrfs-run (1).
If the previous run completed the snapshot but failed during transfer, resuming
sends the snapshot that is already on disk rather than creating a duplicate.
.PP
If every snapshot for
.I BASENAME
already has a correlated backup on the target,
.B resume
is a no-op (nothing is transferred, retention still runs).
.PP
Transfer uses
.B btrfs send \-p
(incremental) when a correlated parent exists on the target, falling back to a
full send otherwise. The received copy is verified after transfer (read-only,
.BR received_uuid ,
correct
.BR parent_uuid )
exactly as in
.BR mybtrfs-run (1).
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B SNAP_DIR
Directory holding the source-side snapshots (same directory used by the
preceding
.BR mybtrfs-run (1)
that was interrupted).
.TP
.B BASENAME
Base name of the snapshot series to resume (e.g.,
.BR home ,
.BR data ).
Only snapshots whose name begins with this basename are considered.
.TP
.B TARGET
Backup destination: a local directory path or a remote
.B ssh://[user@]host[:port]/path
endpoint.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-incremental {yes|strict|no}
Control
.BR "btrfs send" (8)
.B \-p
behavior (default:
.BR yes ).
.RS
.TP
.B yes
Use
.B \-p
(incremental) if a correlated parent exists, otherwise fall back to a full send.
.TP
.B strict
Require a correlated parent; fail if none exists.
.TP
.B no
Always send full (no
.BR \-p ).
.RE
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-min " \fISPEC\fR"
Minimum snapshots to preserve (default:
.BR all ).
Values:
.B all
(keep everything),
.B latest
(keep only the newest),
.B no
(let retention tiers decide),
or a count like
.B 3d
(keep at least 3 days' worth).
.TP
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve " \fISPEC\fR"
Retention tiers for source snapshots (e.g.,
.B "24h 7d 4w 12m"
). See
.BR mybtrfs-run (1)
for format details.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve\-min " \fISPEC\fR"
Minimum backups to preserve (default:
.BR all ).
Same values as
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve\-min .
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-preserve " \fISPEC\fR"
Retention tiers for backups.
Same format as
.BR \-\-snapshot\-preserve .
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to all confirmations (e.g., creating missing directories).
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and summary output.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Append a timestamped audit line to the given file.
.TP
.BR \-\-lock " \fIPATH\fR"
Use a custom run lock file (default: \fI<tmpdir>/mybtrfs-<uid>.lock\fR).
A second run that finds the lock held exits with code 3.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
Tab-separated, one line per action:
.EX
transferred	/path/to/backup
pruned	N	M
.EE
where N is snapshots deleted and M is backups deleted. If nothing was due
(all snapshots already backed up), only the
.B pruned
line is emitted.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Resume completed successfully (including the no-op case).
.TP
.B 1
Transfer or verification failed.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad arguments).
.TP
.B 3
Run lock held by another invocation.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root). Re-run with
.BR sudo (8).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Resume an interrupted backup:
.EX
sudo ./target/debug/mybtrfs resume /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup
.EE
.TP
Resume with retention (enforce before returning):
.EX
sudo ./target/debug/mybtrfs resume /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup \\
  --snapshot-preserve "7d 4w" --target-preserve "30d 12m"
.EE
.TP
Resume to a remote SSH target:
.EX
sudo ./target/debug/mybtrfs resume /mnt/snapshots data \\
  ssh://user@backup.example.com/backups/myhost
.EE
.TP
Non-interactive for cron:
.EX
sudo ./target/debug/mybtrfs resume /mnt/snapshots data /mnt/backup \\
  --yes --quiet --journal /var/log/mybtrfs.journal
.EE
.SH NOTES
.TP
\(bu
.B resume
never creates a new snapshot. If you want a fresh snapshot
.I and
a transfer, use
.BR mybtrfs-run (1).
.TP
\(bu
A snapshot is considered "already backed up" if a backup on the target shares
its
.B uuid
as its
.B received_uuid
(btrfs UUID correlation). Broken or partial backups lacking a
.B received_uuid
are not counted and will be re-sent.
.TP
\(bu
When the transfer is interrupted a second time,
.B resume
can be run again; it will pick the same snapshot and retry.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR mybtrfs-prune (1),
.BR btrfs-send (8),
.BR btrfs-receive (8)
