.TH MYBTRFS-DIFF 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-diff \- estimate changed bytes between two snapshots
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs diff
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIOLDER_SNAP NEWER_SNAP\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs diff
estimates how many bytes have changed between two snapshots.
Useful for predicting incremental backup size before running
.BR mybtrfs-run (1).
.PP
Uses
.BR "btrfs subvolume show" (8)
to obtain the generation of the older snapshot, then
.BR "btrfs subvolume find-new" (8)
to enumerate extents modified since that generation.
The changed-byte count is the sum of all reported extent lengths.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B OLDER_SNAP
Path to an older snapshot (read-only subvolume).
.TP
.B NEWER_SNAP
Path to a newer snapshot (read-only subvolume).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and summary output.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Append a timestamped audit line to the given file.
.TP
.BR \-\-lock " \fIPATH\fR"
Use a custom run lock file (default: \fI<tmpdir>/mybtrfs-<uid>.lock\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
Tab-separated format:
.EX
older_path	older_size	newer_path	newer_size	changed_size
/snap/data.20260623T1803	1.2 GB	/snap/data.20260624T1803	1.5 GB	300 MB
.EE
.PP
Fields:
.TP
.B older_path
Path to the older snapshot.
.TP
.B older_size
Total size of the older snapshot.
.TP
.B newer_path
Path to the newer snapshot.
.TP
.B newer_size
Total size of the newer snapshot.
.TP
.B changed_size
Estimated bytes changed (what
.B mybtrfs send -p
would transfer).
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Diff estimated successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Diff failed (e.g., invalid snapshot path).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Estimate incremental backup size:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs diff /mnt/snapshots/data.20260623T1803 \\
  /mnt/snapshots/data.20260624T1803
.EE
.TP
Check if incremental would be significantly smaller than full:
.EX
NEW=/mnt/snapshots/data.20260624T1803
CHANGED=$(sudo mybtrfs diff /mnt/snapshots/data.20260623T1803 "$NEW" | \\
  awk -F\\\\t '{print $5}' | sed 's/ [A-Z]*$//')
echo "Changed bytes: $CHANGED"
.EE
.SH NOTES
.TP
\(bu
Both snapshots must be on the same btrfs filesystem.
.TP
\(bu
The cutoff passed to
.B find-new
is the older snapshot's
.B generation + 1
(not its creation generation,
.BR cgen ).
On some read-only snapshots
.B gen
exceeds
.B cgen
by one; using
.B generation + 1
ensures no extents are missed.
.TP
\(bu
The estimate is accurate for btrfs copy-on-write semantics; actual sent bytes
may differ slightly (headers, metadata).
.TP
\(bu
If the snapshots are not related by parent/child, the estimate is the full
size of the newer snapshot.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR btrfs-subvolume (8),
.BR btrfs-send (8)
