.TH MYBTRFS-SNAPSHOT 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-snapshot \- create a read-only snapshot of a source subvolume
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs snapshot
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fISRC SNAP_DIR BASENAME\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs snapshot
creates a read-only snapshot of a btrfs subvolume without performing a backup transfer.
This is the first step of
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
but can be called independently for testing or manual workflows.
.PP
Snapshots are named as:
.B <BASENAME>.<TIMESTAMP>[_N]
where N is a collision counter (incremented if the name already exists).
All snapshots are read-only and immutable.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B SRC
Source btrfs subvolume to snapshot.
.TP
.B SNAP_DIR
Directory (on the same filesystem as SRC) where the snapshot will be stored.
Created automatically if missing (with confirmation, unless
.B --yes
is set).
.TP
.B BASENAME
Base name for the snapshot (e.g.,
.BR home,
.BR data).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to all confirmations (e.g., creating missing directories).
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and summary output.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
On success, prints the path to the created snapshot:
.EX
created snapshot: /path/to/snapshot
.EE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Snapshot created successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Snapshot creation failed (e.g., directory creation error).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Create a snapshot:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs snapshot /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data
.EE
.TP
Non-interactive (for cron):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs snapshot /mnt/data /mnt/snapshots data --yes --quiet
.EE
.SH NOTES
.TP
\(bu
Snapshots are read-only and cannot be modified directly.
.TP
\(bu
Snapshots do not consume significant space until the source is modified
(btrfs uses copy-on-write).
.TP
\(bu
Multiple snapshots can be created of the same source without conflicts.
.TP
\(bu
The snapshot and source must be on the same btrfs filesystem.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR btrfs-subvolume (8)
