.TH MYBTRFS-STATUS 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-status \- show backup health: snapshot/backup counts, latest ages, journal-backed history
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs status
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs status
displays backup health and operational history.
Provides:
.TP
\(bu
Count of source snapshots and target backups
.TP
\(bu
Latest snapshot/backup age and timestamp
.TP
\(bu
Health check: whether source and target are in sync
.TP
\(bu
Journal-backed last-run history (if
.B --journal
is configured)
.PP
Useful for monitoring; run regularly to verify backup operations are completing.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B SNAP_DIR
Directory containing source snapshots.
.TP
.B TARGET
Backup target: local directory path or remote
.B ssh://[user@]host[:port]/path.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators. Only the status table is printed.
.TP
.BR \-\-journal " \fIPATH\fR"
Read invocation history from an audit file for last-run details.
If set during
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
every backup logs a timestamped entry here.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
Tab-separated format (header + data rows):
.EX
source	/mnt/snapshots
target	/mnt/backup
snapshots	5
backups	5
latest_snapshot	data.20260624T1803	2m ago
latest_backup	data.20260624T1803	2m ago
health	in-sync
last_run	2026-06-24T18:05:32	run
.EE
.PP
Fields:
.TP
.B source
Path to the snapshot directory.
.TP
.B target
Path to the backup target.
.TP
.B snapshots
Count of source snapshots.
.TP
.B backups
Count of backups on the target.
.TP
.B latest_snapshot
Name and age of the newest source snapshot.
.TP
.B latest_backup
Name and age of the newest backup.
.TP
.B health
.B in-sync
if latest snapshot and backup have the same name/age;
.B out-of-sync
if they differ (e.g., source has new changes but backup is older).
.TP
.B last_run
(Optional) Timestamp and command from the journal (e.g.,
.BR "2026-06-24T18:05:32	run").
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Status retrieved successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Status check failed (e.g., snapshot dir not found).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root for snapshot inspection).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Check backup health:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs status /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup
.EE
.TP
Check health with journal history:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs status /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --journal /var/log/mybtrfs.journal
.EE
.TP
Monitor a remote backup:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs status /mnt/snapshots ssh://backup.example.com/data
.EE
.TP
Scripted check (quiet mode, tab-separated):
.EX
sudo mybtrfs status --quiet /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup | \\
  awk -F\\\\t '$6 == "out-of-sync" { print "WARNING: backup is stale" }'
.EE
.SH NOTES
.TP
\(bu
Journal history requires that
.BR mybtrfs-run (1)
was invoked with
.B --journal
in the past.
.TP
\(bu
Age formatting: "just now", "2m ago", "3h ago", "1d ago", etc.
.TP
\(bu
.B health
is a heuristic: it checks if the latest names match, not whether all data is synchronized.
.TP
\(bu
Remote backups (
.B ssh://
) are inspected over SSH; the status reflects the remote state.
.SH MONITORING & CRON
Typical cron setup to monitor backup health daily:
.EX
0 8 * * * sudo mybtrfs status /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup \\
  --journal /var/log/mybtrfs.journal | grep out-of-sync && \\
  mail -s "Backup is stale" ops@example.com
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-run (1),
.BR mybtrfs-list (1),
.BR mybtrfs-stats (1)
