.TH MYBTRFS-LIST 1 "June 2026" "mybtrfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mybtrfs-list \- list source snapshots with their correlated backups
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mybtrfs list
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fISNAP_DIR TARGET\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mybtrfs list
displays an inventory of source snapshots and their corresponding backups,
organized by snapshot with child backups indented below.
.PP
Each snapshot is correlated with its backups by matching UUIDs and parent relationships.
A snapshot with no backup is marked as unsynced; a backup with no source snapshot
is marked as orphaned.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B SNAP_DIR
Directory containing source snapshots.
.TP
.B TARGET
Backup target: local directory path or remote
.B ssh://[user@]host[:port]/path.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators and headers. Tab-separated output only.
.TP
.BR \-\-log-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Write diagnostic logs to a file.
.SH OUTPUT
Human-readable hierarchical list (or tab-separated if
.B --quiet):
.EX
snapshot	data.20260624T1803
backup	data.20260624T1803
snapshot	data.20260623T1803
backup	data.20260623T1803
backup	data.20260623T1500 (orphaned)
.EE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
List retrieved successfully.
.TP
.B 1
List failed (e.g., snapshot dir not found).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 4
Permission denied (requires root).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
List all snapshots and backups:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs list /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup
.EE
.TP
List in quiet mode for scripting:
.EX
sudo mybtrfs list --quiet /mnt/snapshots /mnt/backup | grep snapshot
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mybtrfs (1),
.BR mybtrfs-status (1),
.BR mybtrfs-stats (1)
